README.md, before:

# Azure MCP via `azd` extensions

This repository demonstrates a modular, scalable approach to Azure automation and resource management using the Azure Developer CLI (`azd`) and the Model Context Protocol (MCP). The root `mcp.azure` extension provides a single, unified MCP server that dynamically discovers, installs, and delegates requests to provider-specific MCP extensions (such as storage, keyvault, resource, and azd). This architecture enables real-time, programmatic access to Azure resources and services, supports iterative learning and tool discovery for LLMs/agents, and allows teams to build, ship, and update extensions independently—without requiring changes to the root server. Extensions can be implemented in any language and are loaded on demand, ensuring a minimal, relevant tool surface for automation and AI scenarios.

## Extension Examples

- `mcp.azure` - Root extension that host the Azure MCP server with dynamic discovery
- `mcp.azd` - Extension MCP server for working with `azd` CLI
- `mcp.resource` - Extension MCP server for working with generic Azure resources
- `mcp.keyvault` - Extension MCP server for working with Azure KeyVault resources
- `mcp.storage` - Extension MCP server for working with Azure Storage Accounts

## Highlights

- Single server registration in VS Code
- Single tool "azure" in the server
- Root tool discovers capabilities via `azd` extensions.
- Extensions are dynamically installed and invoked by the root server
- Each `azd` extension such as "storage", "keyvault" etc hosts its own MCP server
- Root server acts as an MCP server and client and dynamically dispatches calls to the child servers
- Azure teams can build, ship and iterate without any releases or changes required to the root extension
- Extensions can be built in any language

## Azure Developer CLI (`azd`)

- Single binary executable
- ~30MB unzipped
- Supports Windows, MacOS & Linux in both AMD64 and ARM64
- Easily embedded in containers (ex. Azure Cloud Shell, vscode.dev/azure)
- Installable via popular package managers including Choco, Winget, Homebrew, cURL
  - `npx` support can easily be added.
- **Security & Authentication:** Uses Azure authentication (e.g., Azure CLI login, service principals, managed identities); extensions inherit this context.
- **Extensibility:** Supports both official and custom extensions, distributed via public or private sources.
- **Version Compatibility:** Extensions should target compatible versions of `azd`; the root server can check for version mismatches.

### Performance

No in-depth performance metrics at this time for the MCP scenario.

- Single `azure` tool, no tool overload to consume LLMs/agents
- `azd` MCP extensions are lazily loaded on demand, no startup overhead
- Only required extensions are loaded, minimizing memory and CPU usage
- Installing new extensions only takes a few seconds
- Extensions as small as 5MB each (7MB extracted)
- Root server can check for extension updates and automatically update clients
- The architecture scales well as more extensions are added, since unused extensions do not impact baseline performance
- The root server starts quickly; additional delay only occurs when a new extension is first used

### Deployment

MCP contributors can leverage the [`azd` Extension Framework](https://github.com/Azure/azure-dev/blob/main/cli/azd/docs/extension-framework.md) to build, package and publish extensions to an `azd` extension source.

- **CI/CD Integration:** MCP extensions can be built and published as part of a CI/CD pipeline; automated testing is recommended.
- **Update Strategy:** Both the root server and extensions can be updated independently; the root server can check for and prompt updates to extensions.
- **Multi-Platform Support:** Both `azd` and extensions support Windows, MacOS, and Linux; deployment artifacts should be built for all target platforms.

MCP extensions can be hosted on official `azd` extension source or can reside in a custom extension source hosted in a local file or publicly accessible HTTPS endpoint.

## Architecture & Flow (Sequence Diagram)

The following sequence diagram illustrates the dynamic, on-demand nature of extension management and call dispatching:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User as LLM/Agent or User
    participant AzureMCP as azd mcp azure (Root MCP Server)
    participant azd as azd CLI
    participant Provider as azd mcp Extension (e.g., mcp.storage)

    User->>AzureMCP: Call (intent/tool/command/parameters/learn)
    AzureMCP->>azd: azd ext list --tags azure,mcp
    azd-->>AzureMCP: Extension metadata (list of providers)
    AzureMCP->>User: Tool list (if learn)
    User->>AzureMCP: Call tool/command
    AzureMCP->>AzureMCP: Check tool client cache
    alt Not cached
        AzureMCP->>azd: azd ext install <provider>
        azd-->>AzureMCP: Install result
        AzureMCP->>azd: <provider> server start
        azd-->>AzureMCP: Provider MCP server started
        AzureMCP->>AzureMCP: Create MCP client
    end
    AzureMCP->>Provider: Call tool/command
    Provider-->>AzureMCP: Result
    AzureMCP-->>User: Result
```

## Design Tradeoffs: Dynamic Extensions vs. Monolithic Server

This project uses a **dynamic extension model**: the root `mcp.azure` server discovers, installs, and starts provider MCP extensions on demand. This is in contrast to a **monolithic model** where all MCP tools are coded, shipped, and loaded in the root server.

**Dynamic Extension Model (current):**

- Extensions are developed, shipped, and updated independently.
- New tools/extensions require no changes to the root server.
- Only required extensions are loaded, reducing resource usage and startup time.
- Enables teams to use any language or tech stack.
- Slightly higher first-use latency due to extra roundtrips: discovery, possible install, and server startup before the first tool/command call. Subsequent calls are fast due to caching.
- Keeps the tool surface minimal and relevant for LLMs/agents, reducing the risk of tool bloat, confusion, or delay during initial tool selection.

**Monolithic Model (all tools in root):**

- All tools are always available, with no install/start delay.
- Simpler architecture, but all tools must be coded in the root server's language.
- Any update or new tool requires a full root server release.
- Larger binary and higher resource usage.
- May expose a large number of tools at once, which could bloat/confuse/delay LLMs or agents during initial tool selection, especially as the number of tools grows.

This dynamic approach maximizes flexibility, scalability, and team autonomy, at the cost of slightly increased complexity and first-use latency, while also helping LLMs/agents focus on a relevant, manageable set of tools.

Commit message:

Adds more details about learn pattern to README

README.md, after:

# Azure MCP via `azd` extensions

This repository demonstrates a modular, scalable approach to Azure automation and resource management using the Azure Developer CLI (`azd`) and the Model Context Protocol (MCP). The root `mcp.azure` extension provides a single, unified MCP server that dynamically discovers, installs, and delegates requests to provider-specific MCP extensions (such as storage, keyvault, resource, and azd). This architecture enables real-time, programmatic access to Azure resources and services, supports iterative learning and tool discovery for LLMs/agents, and allows teams to build, ship, and update extensions independently—without requiring changes to the root server. Extensions can be implemented in any language and are loaded on demand, ensuring a minimal, relevant tool surface for automation and AI scenarios.

## Extension Examples

- `mcp.azure` - Root extension that host the Azure MCP server with dynamic discovery
- `mcp.azd` - Extension MCP server for working with `azd` CLI
- `mcp.resource` - Extension MCP server for working with generic Azure resources
- `mcp.keyvault` - Extension MCP server for working with Azure KeyVault resources
- `mcp.storage` - Extension MCP server for working with Azure Storage Accounts

## Highlights

- Single server registration in VS Code
- Single tool "azure" in the server
- Root tool discovers capabilities via `azd` extensions.
- Extensions are dynamically installed and invoked by the root server
- Each `azd` extension such as "storage", "keyvault" etc hosts its own MCP server
- Root server acts as an MCP server and client and dynamically dispatches calls to the child servers
- Azure teams can build, ship and iterate without any releases or changes required to the root extension
- Extensions can be built in any language

## Azure Developer CLI (`azd`)

- Single binary executable
- ~30MB unzipped
- Supports Windows, MacOS & Linux in both AMD64 and ARM64
- Easily embedded in containers (ex. Azure Cloud Shell, vscode.dev/azure)
- Installable via popular package managers including Choco, Winget, Homebrew, cURL
  - `npx` support can easily be added.
- **Security & Authentication:** Uses Azure authentication (e.g., Azure CLI login, service principals, managed identities); extensions inherit this context.
- **Extensibility:** Supports both official and custom extensions, distributed via public or private sources.
- **Version Compatibility:** Extensions should target compatible versions of `azd`; the root server can check for version mismatches.

### Performance

No in-depth performance metrics at this time for the MCP scenario.

- Single `azure` tool, no tool overload to consume LLMs/agents
- `azd` MCP extensions are lazily loaded on demand, no startup overhead
- Only required extensions are loaded, minimizing memory and CPU usage
- Installing new extensions only takes a few seconds
- Extensions as small as 5MB each (7MB extracted)
- Root server can check for extension updates and automatically update clients
- The architecture scales well as more extensions are added, since unused extensions do not impact baseline performance
- The root server starts quickly; additional delay only occurs when a new extension is first used

### Deployment

MCP contributors can leverage the [`azd` Extension Framework](https://github.com/Azure/azure-dev/blob/main/cli/azd/docs/extension-framework.md) to build, package and publish extensions to an `azd` extension source.

- **CI/CD Integration:** MCP extensions can be built and published as part of a CI/CD pipeline; automated testing is recommended.
- **Update Strategy:** Both the root server and extensions can be updated independently; the root server can check for and prompt updates to extensions.
- **Multi-Platform Support:** Both `azd` and extensions support Windows, MacOS, and Linux; deployment artifacts should be built for all target platforms.

MCP extensions can be hosted on official `azd` extension source or can reside in a custom extension source hosted in a local file or publicly accessible HTTPS endpoint.

## Dynamic Discovery & the "Learn" Pattern

The root `mcp.azure` server uses a dynamic discovery mechanism to enumerate and expose all available Azure MCP extensions at runtime. When the server starts, or when an agent or user requests to "learn" about available tools, the server:

- Calls `azd ext list --tags azure,mcp` to discover all installed and available MCP extensions.
- Dynamically installs any missing extensions on demand.
- Starts the MCP server for each provider extension only when needed.
- Maintains a cache of running tool clients to avoid redundant startups.

### The "Learn" Pattern

The "learn" pattern is a core feature for LLMs/agents and users to explore available capabilities. When a request is made with the `learn` argument set to `true`, the root server returns a list of available tools and their schemas. This response uses the **same MCP tool list schema** as the MCP protocol itself, ensuring:

- Consistency: The tool list and schema are always up-to-date and machine-readable.
- Iterative Exploration: Agents can call `learn` recursively, specifying a tool name to drill down into its supported commands and parameters.
- Self-Describing: The system is fully self-describing, enabling agents to reason about and select tools programmatically.

For example:
- `learn: true` with no tool specified returns the top-level list of available tools (e.g., storage, keyvault, resource, azd, etc.).
- `learn: true, tool: "storage"` returns the list of commands and parameters supported by the storage extension, using the same MCP tool schema.

This approach makes the system highly discoverable and agent-friendly, supporting robust, real-time, and iterative automation scenarios.

## Architecture & Flow (Sequence Diagram)

The following sequence diagram illustrates the dynamic, on-demand nature of extension management and call dispatching:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User as LLM/Agent or User
    participant AzureMCP as azd mcp azure (Root MCP Server)
    participant azd as azd CLI
    participant Provider as azd mcp Extension (e.g., mcp.storage)

    User->>AzureMCP: Call (intent/tool/command/parameters/learn)
    AzureMCP->>azd: azd ext list --tags azure,mcp
    azd-->>AzureMCP: Extension metadata (list of providers)
    AzureMCP->>User: Tool list (if learn)
    User->>AzureMCP: Call tool/command
    AzureMCP->>AzureMCP: Check tool client cache
    alt Not cached
        AzureMCP->>azd: azd ext install <provider>
        azd-->>AzureMCP: Install result
        AzureMCP->>azd: <provider> server start
        azd-->>AzureMCP: Provider MCP server started
        AzureMCP->>AzureMCP: Create MCP client
    end
    AzureMCP->>Provider: Call tool/command
    Provider-->>AzureMCP: Result
    AzureMCP-->>User: Result
```

## Design Tradeoffs: Dynamic Extensions vs. Monolithic Server

This project uses a **dynamic extension model**: the root `mcp.azure` server discovers, installs, and starts provider MCP extensions on demand. This is in contrast to a **monolithic model** where all MCP tools are coded, shipped, and loaded in the root server.

**Dynamic Extension Model (current):**

- Extensions are developed, shipped, and updated independently.
- New tools/extensions require no changes to the root server.
- Only required extensions are loaded, reducing resource usage and startup time.
- Enables teams to use any language or tech stack.
- Slightly higher first-use latency due to extra roundtrips: discovery, possible install, and server startup before the first tool/command call. Subsequent calls are fast due to caching.
- Keeps the tool surface minimal and relevant for LLMs/agents, reducing the risk of tool bloat, confusion, or delay during initial tool selection.

**Monolithic Model (all tools in root):**

- All tools are always available, with no install/start delay.
- Simpler architecture, but all tools must be coded in the root server's language.
- Any update or new tool requires a full root server release.
- Larger binary and higher resource usage.
- May expose a large number of tools at once, which could bloat/confuse/delay LLMs or agents during initial tool selection, especially as the number of tools grows.

This dynamic approach maximizes flexibility, scalability, and team autonomy, at the cost of slightly increased complexity and first-use latency, while also helping LLMs/agents focus on a relevant, manageable set of tools.
